README.md, before:

# OpenAI4J

OpenAI4J is a fluent Java wrapper for the [OpenAI API](https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference).
It builds on top of the lightweight [`api-base`](https://github.com/hwalde/api-base) library which
handles HTTP communication, authentication and exponential backoff. The goal is to provide a type safe
and convenient way to access OpenAI services from modern Java (JDK&nbsp;21+).

## Features

* Chat Completions including tool calling, structured outputs and vision inputs
* Image generation with GPT-4o's `image-1`, DALL·E&nbsp;2 and DALL·E&nbsp;3
* Embeddings with helper for cosine similarity
* Speech synthesis (TTS), audio transcription and translation
* Token counting utilities via `jtokkit`
* Fluent builder APIs for all requests
* Examples demonstrating each feature

## Installation

Add the dependency from Maven Central:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>de.entwicklertraining</groupId>
    <artifactId>openapi4j</artifactId>
    <version>1.0.0</version>
</dependency>
```

## Basic Usage

Instantiate a `OpenAIClient` and use the builders exposed by its fluent API. The
[function calling example](examples/src/main/java/de/entwicklertraining/openai4j/examples/OpenAIChatCompletionWithFunctionCallingExample.java)
shows how tools can be defined and executed:

```java
OpenAIToolDefinition weatherFunction = OpenAIToolDefinition.builder("get_local_weather")
        .description("Get weather information for a location.")
        .parameter("location", OpenAIJsonSchema.stringSchema("Name of the city"), true)
        .callback(ctx -> {
            String loc = ctx.arguments().getString("location");
            return OpenAIToolResult.of("Sunny in " + loc + " with a high of 25°C.");
        })
        .build();

OpenAIClient client = new OpenAIClient();
OpenAIChatCompletionResponse resp = client.chat().completion()
        .model("gpt-4o-mini")
        .addSystemMessage("You are a helpful assistant.")
        .addUserMessage("What's the weather in Berlin and the current time?")
        .addTool(weatherFunction)
        .execute();
System.out.println(resp.assistantMessage());
```
【F:examples/src/main/java/de/entwicklertraining/openai4j/examples/OpenAIChatCompletionWithFunctionCallingExample.java†L10-L44】

The [DALL·E&nbsp;3 example](examples/src/main/java/de/entwicklertraining/openai4j/examples/DallE3Example.java)
illustrates image generation:

```java
OpenAIClient client = new OpenAIClient();
DallE3Response response = client.images().generations().dalle3()
        .prompt("A futuristic city floating in the sky, with neon lights")
        .size(ImageSize.SIZE_1024x1024)
        .responseFormat(ResponseFormat.B64_JSON)
        .n(1)
        .quality(ImageQuality.HD)
        .style(ImageStyle.VIVID)
        .execute();
List<String> images = response.images();
```
【F:examples/src/main/java/de/entwicklertraining/openai4j/examples/DallE3Example.java†L26-L43】

See the `examples` module for more demonstrations (embeddings, speech, translation, web search
and vision).

## Project Structure

The library follows a clear structure:

* **`OpenAIClient`** – entry point for all API calls. Extends `ApiClient` from *api-base*
  and registers error handling. It exposes sub clients (`chat()`, `images()`, `audio()`, `embeddings()`).
* **Request/Response classes** – located in packages like
  `chat.completion`, `images.generations`, `audio.*`, `embeddings`.
  Each request extends `OpenAIRequest` and has an inner `Builder` that extends
  `ApiRequestBuilderBase` from *api-base*. Responses extend `OpenAIResponse`.
* **Tool calling** – defined via `OpenAIToolDefinition` and handled by
  `OpenAIToolsCallback` and `OpenAIToolCallContext`.
* **Structured outputs** – use `OpenAIJsonSchema` and `OpenAIResponseFormat`.
* **Token utilities** – `OpenAITokenService` counts tokens via `jtokkit`.

The examples directory mirrors these packages and can be used as a quick start.

## Extending OpenAI4J

1. **Create a Request** – subclass `OpenAIRequest` and implement `getRelativeUrl`,
   `getHttpMethod`, `getBody` and `createResponse`. Provide a nested builder
   extending `ApiRequestBuilderBase`.
2. **Create a Response** – subclass `OpenAIResponse` and parse the JSON or binary
   payload returned by OpenAI.
3. **Expose a builder** – add a convenience method in `OpenAIClient` returning your
   new builder so users can call it fluently.

Thanks to *api-base*, sending the request is handled by calling
`client.sendRequest(request)` or by using the builder’s `execute()` method which
internally delegates to `sendRequest` with optional exponential backoff.
See [api-base’s Readme](https://github.com/hwalde/api-base) for details on available
settings like retries, timeouts or capture hooks.

## Building

This project uses Maven. Compile the library and run examples with:

```bash
mvn package
```

## License

OpenAI4J is distributed under the MIT License as defined in the project `pom.xml`.

Commit message:

Add warning about limited OpenAI features

README.md, after:

# OpenAI4J

> **⚠️ Important Notice**
>
> I created this library because I was looking for a Java library that interacts with the OpenAI API while staying as close to the raw API as possible—the official Java library does not. This implementation is fully compatible with OpenAI but only includes the features I personally require. I maintain similar libraries for DeepSeek and Gemini, each in its own repository so usage remains explicit. Everything supported by the Java API works here.
> 
> At the moment the library only covers the parts I need. Chat Completions are implemented with nearly every option, but many specialized endpoints—like Fine Tuning or Evals—are missing. If you need additional functionality, feel free to implement it yourself or submit a pull request and I will consider adding it.

OpenAI4J is a fluent Java wrapper for the [OpenAI API](https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference).
It builds on top of the lightweight [`api-base`](https://github.com/hwalde/api-base) library which
handles HTTP communication, authentication and exponential backoff. The goal is to provide a type safe
and convenient way to access OpenAI services from modern Java (JDK&nbsp;21+).

## Features

* Chat Completions including tool calling, structured outputs and vision inputs
* Image generation with GPT-4o's `image-1`, DALL·E&nbsp;2 and DALL·E&nbsp;3
* Embeddings with helper for cosine similarity
* Speech synthesis (TTS), audio transcription and translation
* Token counting utilities via `jtokkit`
* Fluent builder APIs for all requests
* Examples demonstrating each feature

## Installation

Add the dependency from Maven Central:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>de.entwicklertraining</groupId>
    <artifactId>openapi4j</artifactId>
    <version>1.0.0</version>
</dependency>
```

## Basic Usage

Instantiate a `OpenAIClient` and use the builders exposed by its fluent API. The
[function calling example](examples/src/main/java/de/entwicklertraining/openai4j/examples/OpenAIChatCompletionWithFunctionCallingExample.java)
shows how tools can be defined and executed:

```java
OpenAIToolDefinition weatherFunction = OpenAIToolDefinition.builder("get_local_weather")
        .description("Get weather information for a location.")
        .parameter("location", OpenAIJsonSchema.stringSchema("Name of the city"), true)
        .callback(ctx -> {
            String loc = ctx.arguments().getString("location");
            return OpenAIToolResult.of("Sunny in " + loc + " with a high of 25°C.");
        })
        .build();

OpenAIClient client = new OpenAIClient();
OpenAIChatCompletionResponse resp = client.chat().completion()
        .model("gpt-4o-mini")
        .addSystemMessage("You are a helpful assistant.")
        .addUserMessage("What's the weather in Berlin and the current time?")
        .addTool(weatherFunction)
        .execute();
System.out.println(resp.assistantMessage());
```
【F:examples/src/main/java/de/entwicklertraining/openai4j/examples/OpenAIChatCompletionWithFunctionCallingExample.java†L10-L44】

The [DALL·E&nbsp;3 example](examples/src/main/java/de/entwicklertraining/openai4j/examples/DallE3Example.java)
illustrates image generation:

```java
OpenAIClient client = new OpenAIClient();
DallE3Response response = client.images().generations().dalle3()
        .prompt("A futuristic city floating in the sky, with neon lights")
        .size(ImageSize.SIZE_1024x1024)
        .responseFormat(ResponseFormat.B64_JSON)
        .n(1)
        .quality(ImageQuality.HD)
        .style(ImageStyle.VIVID)
        .execute();
List<String> images = response.images();
```
【F:examples/src/main/java/de/entwicklertraining/openai4j/examples/DallE3Example.java†L26-L43】

See the `examples` module for more demonstrations (embeddings, speech, translation, web search
and vision).

## Project Structure

The library follows a clear structure:

* **`OpenAIClient`** – entry point for all API calls. Extends `ApiClient` from *api-base*
  and registers error handling. It exposes sub clients (`chat()`, `images()`, `audio()`, `embeddings()`).
* **Request/Response classes** – located in packages like
  `chat.completion`, `images.generations`, `audio.*`, `embeddings`.
  Each request extends `OpenAIRequest` and has an inner `Builder` that extends
  `ApiRequestBuilderBase` from *api-base*. Responses extend `OpenAIResponse`.
* **Tool calling** – defined via `OpenAIToolDefinition` and handled by
  `OpenAIToolsCallback` and `OpenAIToolCallContext`.
* **Structured outputs** – use `OpenAIJsonSchema` and `OpenAIResponseFormat`.
* **Token utilities** – `OpenAITokenService` counts tokens via `jtokkit`.

The examples directory mirrors these packages and can be used as a quick start.

## Extending OpenAI4J

1. **Create a Request** – subclass `OpenAIRequest` and implement `getRelativeUrl`,
   `getHttpMethod`, `getBody` and `createResponse`. Provide a nested builder
   extending `ApiRequestBuilderBase`.
2. **Create a Response** – subclass `OpenAIResponse` and parse the JSON or binary
   payload returned by OpenAI.
3. **Expose a builder** – add a convenience method in `OpenAIClient` returning your
   new builder so users can call it fluently.

Thanks to *api-base*, sending the request is handled by calling
`client.sendRequest(request)` or by using the builder’s `execute()` method which
internally delegates to `sendRequest` with optional exponential backoff.
See [api-base’s Readme](https://github.com/hwalde/api-base) for details on available
settings like retries, timeouts or capture hooks.

## Building

This project uses Maven. Compile the library and run examples with:

```bash
mvn package
```

## License

OpenAI4J is distributed under the MIT License as defined in the project `pom.xml`.
